---
layout:   article
title:    Developing new libraries
previous: libraries
next:     deployment
---


Our toolchain
-------------

Much of our JavaScript development toolchain consists of utilities written in
Ruby. To get them up and running on your system you'll need Ruby 1.8.6 or
higher and Rubygems, the Ruby package manager. Once those are installed, you
just need to run the following command to install the relevant dependencies:

    sudo gem install jake helium

All of our internal libraries, including JS.Class and Ojay, are kept under
version control with [Git][git]. You will need a recent version of Git
installed on your computer in order to develop new libraries and modify
existing ones. It's very likely available through your operating system's
package manager (e.g. `aptitude` on Ubuntu), but installing it from source is
a relatively painless procedure.

There are many introductory Git tutorials available on the web. The Git
repository hosting site, [GitHub][github], list several on
[their help site][ghhelp]. If you need commit access to any of our GitHub
repositories, just ask. Please note, however, that Git is a _distributed_
version control system: you can get a full copy of the entire repository and
commit changes locally, without needing to have commit rights to the version
on GitHub.


  [git]:    http://git-scm.com/
  [github]: http://github.com/
  [ghhelp]: http://help.github.com/


Build tools
-----------

[Jake][jake] is a command line tool for building JavaScript packages from
source code. Using YAML config files, you can specify any number of build files
to be generated by concatenating and minifying groups of source files. All of
our JavaScript libraries, if they exist outside a particular client project,
have a Jake config file, `jake.yml`.

These config files also specify the JavaScript objects that the library
provides, and which other objects they rely on. For example, the [Panel][panel]
library provides three objects--`panel`, `Panel` and `PanelOverlay`--and
depends on four: `JS.Class`, `Ojay`, `Ojay.HTML` and `Ojay.ContentOverlay`.

The YAML code is very simple, and as we shall see, a skeleton `jake.yml` file
can be generated when starting work on a new library.

{% highlight yaml %}
provides:
  - panel
  - Panel
  - PanelOverlay
requires:
  - JS.Class
  - Ojay
  - Ojay.HTML
  - Ojay.ContentOverlay
{% endhighlight %}

This dependency data is used by our other JavaScript deployment tool,
[Helium][helium].


  [jake]:   http://github.com/jcoglan/jake
  [helium]: http://github.com/othermedia/helium
  [panel]:  http://github.com/othermedia/panel


Extractions
-----------

JavaScript libraries tend to begin their lives in client projects. After all,
we don't write these things for no reason: they're created to address specific
needs. However, as soon as something begins to be used for more than one
project, it needs to be extracted into a separate library.
[YouTube Player][ytp] and [Panel][panel] both started out within particular
projects, but proved sufficiently useful and widely applicable that they were
extracted into generic libraries.

There are several advantages to this way of doing things. Firstly, no code is
ever written just because it might turn out to be useful: it is created to
solve a specific problem at a specific point in time, and even if it turns out
not to be generally useful, it will still have served its purpose.

Secondly, extractions are proven: they have been shown to work in real-world
situations. There are two aspects to this. Firstly, they solve the problem they
were intended to; secondly, their correctness and reliability are known
quantities.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, extractions offer one the possibility of
improving on one's initial efforts. Application code is often written in too
much of a hurry; "After all," thinks the programmer, "it will never appear
outside this site, so all it needs to do is _work_--I don't need to spend days
ensuring it's interoperable and has a good API."

When extracting a library, one shouldn't be afraid of changing the API. After
all, the intention is that the extracted code will be used in many places, not
just one, so care must be taken to ensure that it will be easy to use and
provide the features required. Fred Brooks suggested "write one to throw away",
and the extraction process provides this: there are often important lessons to
be learned from the mistakes and limitations of the first version. Discovering
and solving these problems is a proven route to good library design.


  [ytp]:   http://github.com/othermedia/youtube-player


Writing the library
-------------------

The first step in writing a new library is to generate a stub project with the
Helium command line tool. Just run the `he create` command:

    he create my-library

Obviously `my-library` should be the name of the library you're writing. This
will produce a summary like this one.

    Generating JavaScript project in /Users/beastaugh/projects/my-library...
    create my-library/test/index.html
    create my-library/source/test.js
    create my-library/Jakefile
    create my-library/jake.yml
    create my-library/.gitignore

    Building project using Jake...
    create my-library/build/test.js
    created: /Users/beastaugh/projects/my-library/build/test.js
    create test/build/test-min.js
    created: /Users/beastaugh/projects/my-library/build/test-min.js
    Copying ./build/test-min.js --> ./test/lib/test-min.js
    Writing package listing to ./test/packages.js

    ... done, now your new JavaScript project is ready.

      * Build your project by running `jake` in the root directory
      * We've added generated files to your .gitignore
      * Keep your dependencies up-to-date in jake.yml
      * Point test/index.html at your Helium server and write some tests!


* Generating a stub project with `he create`
* Moving your existing code into the stub project
* Making the code more general
* Writing test cases


Dependency management
---------------------

* JS.Packages
* Writing manifests
* Custom loaders
