functional-programming.md, before:

---
layout:   article
title:    Functional programming
previous: performance
next:     jake
---


Functions are the basic unit of composition in JavaScript. They allow us to
create reusable subroutines, add methods to objects, and much more. But
functions are not merely procedures--they are data. This opens any number of
doors, including higher-order functions, function composition and currying--in
other words, the arsenal of techniques, idioms and approaches generally
referred to as _functional programming_.

JavaScript includes several language features and standard library functions
which are admirably suited to programming in a functional style. General
introductions to these features are available elsewhere, for example in the
[Rhino book][rhino] and [JavaScript: The Good Parts][good].

  [rhino]: http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596101992
  [good]:  http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596517748


Lambdas
-------

Lambdas are simply anonymous functions, and their use is ubiquitous in modern
JavaScript development. Event handlers, for example, are almost always lambdas.

{% highlight javascript %}
function() {
    // Inside the lambda
};
{% endhighlight %}

The term 'lambda' comes from the [lambda calculus][lc], where the Greek letter
λ denotes a function. Lambdas are useful for ad-hoc function definitions, where
a function is not going to be reused, but they are most important--both in
JavaScript development generally, and in functional programming
specifically--for creating _closures_.

  [lc]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus


Closures
--------

A closure is a function with free variables bound in its lexical environment.
That's a bit of a mouthful, so let's take it piece by piece. Here's an example
of a function containing a free variable.

{% highlight javascript %}
var f = function(x) {
    var y = 5;
    
    return x + y + z;
};
{% endhighlight %}

The variable `x`, as a parameter of `f`, is _bound_ in the scope of that
function. Variables can also be bound with the `var` keyword, so the variable
`y` is also considered a bound variable. The variable `z`, however, is not
bound either as a parameter of `f` or within the function body using the `var`
keyword, so we say it occurs _free_.

If a function containing a free variable is a closure, then that variable must
be bound in some outer scope, i.e. in the environment of the function. To make
`f` into a closure we must bind `y` in `f`'s environment.

{% highlight javascript %}
(function() {
    var y = 1,
    
    f = function(x) {
        var y = 5;
        
        return x + y + z;
    };
  
    return f;
})();
{% endhighlight %}

One important use of closures, outside functional programming strictly defined,
is memoisation. For example, consider a function `fib` which calculates any
given [Fibonacci number][fibnum]. If we recalculate the entire sequence of
Fibonacci numbers each time up to our chosen _n_ the function will run in _O(N)_
time. However, if we memoise the results it will return previously-calculated
results in _O(1)_ time, and results which haven't yet been calculated will be
returned in _O(N-x)_ time, where _x_ is the number of previously-calculated
results.

By creating a new anonymous function and immediately calling it, we can hide
the memoised sequence from the rest of the program, thus ensuring it can't be
accidentally overwritten, and allowing our function to retain a pure interface.

{% highlight javascript %}
var fib = (function() {
    var sequence = [0, 1],
    
    updateTo = function(limit) {
        for (var i = sequence.length; i <= limit; i++) {
            sequence[i] = sequence[i - 1] + sequence[i - 2];
        }
    };
    
    // This closure, as the return value of the immediately-executed
    // lambda, will be assigned to the variable 'fib'.
    return function(index) {
        if (!sequence[index]) {
            updateTo(index);
        }
        
        return sequence[index];
    };
})();
{% endhighlight %}

Richard Cornford's [discussion of JavaScript closures][closures] is a
valuable supplement to this section.

  [fibnum]:   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number
  [closures]: http://www.jibbering.com/faq/faq_notes/closures.html


Higher-order functions
----------------------

Amongst the benefits of functional programming are brevity, clarity and
generality. We can write simple code which describes our intentions clearly,
and produce general-purpose tools which can then be specialised to the task at
hand.

One example of a specific task is adding 1 to every number in a list. We can
break this down into two functions: a function _f_ that adds 1 to any number,
and a function _g_ that applies the first function to each value in a list.

> f(x) = x + 1

So _f(0) = 1_, _f(1) = 2_ and so on. `Map` is a function which takes two
arguments, a function and a list, and applies the function to each value in the
list.

> g = map(f)

We now have a function _g_ which can be passed a list of values, and produces a
new list as a result, e.g. _g(\[1,2,3\]) → \[2,3,4\]_. More generally,

> g(\[x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>, ..., x<sub>n-1</sub>, x<sub>n</sub>\]) →
> \[f(x<sub>1</sub>), f(x<sub>2</sub>), ..., f(x<sub>n-1</sub>),
> f(x<sub>n</sub>)\]

`Map` is an example of a higher-order function--a function that takes another
function as an argument.


Referential transparency
------------------------



Currying
--------



Folding over lists
------------------

We have seen that `map` can be specialised to perform particular kinds of
transformation, but `map` itself is a specialisation of a more general type of
function: fold.

Folds take lists and reduce them to another value. In the case of `map`, this
is another list of the same length as the initial list, but the result of the
fold could as easily be a single number, or a string, or some more complex data
type.

Folds take three arguments: a function, an initial value, and a list. A simple
example is `sum`, a function that takes a list of numbers and adds them
together: _sum(\[1,2,3\]) → 6_, and more generally,

> sum(\[x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>, ..., x<sub>n-1</sub>, x<sub>n</sub>\]) →
> x<sub>1</sub> + x<sub>2</sub> + ... + x<sub>n-1</sub> + x<sub>n</sub>

Let's start by defining the function `add` which will take the result of the
fold so far and add it to the current value.

> add x y = x + y

We could write this almost as simply in JavaScript.

{% highlight javascript %}
var add = function(x, y) {
    return x + y;
};
{% endhighlight %}

`Sum` is then simply the function we get by passing `add` and an initial value
(in this case `0`) to `fold`.

> sum = fold(add, 0)

JavaScript's built-in fold function is called `reduce`, but as we can't
partially apply standard library functions, we'll have to curry it.

{% highlight javascript %}
var sum = function(list) {
    var _sum = function() {
        return reduce(add, 0, list);
    };
    
    return list ? _sum(list) : _sum;
};
{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, we can use the `foldl` function we defined earlier, for a far
simpler construction.

{% highlight javascript %}
var sum = foldl(add, 0);
{% endhighlight %}


Specialising folds
------------------



Why functional programming?
---------------------------

To understand why functional programming matters, in general, one should begin
by reading John Hughes' paper, [Why Functional Programming Matters][whyfp].

  [whyfp]: http://www.cs.chalmers.se/~rjmh/Papers/whyfp.html

Commit message:

Add a reference on the algorithmic complexity of the fib function.

functional-programming.md, after:

---
layout:   article
title:    Functional programming
previous: performance
next:     jake
---


Functions are the basic unit of composition in JavaScript. They allow us to
create reusable subroutines, add methods to objects, and much more. But
functions are not merely procedures--they are data. This opens any number of
doors, including higher-order functions, function composition and currying--in
other words, the arsenal of techniques, idioms and approaches generally
referred to as _functional programming_.

JavaScript includes several language features and standard library functions
which are admirably suited to programming in a functional style. General
introductions to these features are available elsewhere, for example in the
[Rhino book][rhino] and [JavaScript: The Good Parts][good].

  [rhino]: http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596101992
  [good]:  http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596517748


Lambdas
-------

Lambdas are simply anonymous functions, and their use is ubiquitous in modern
JavaScript development. Event handlers, for example, are almost always lambdas.

{% highlight javascript %}
function() {
    // Inside the lambda
};
{% endhighlight %}

The term 'lambda' comes from the [lambda calculus][lc], where the Greek letter
λ denotes a function. Lambdas are useful for ad-hoc function definitions, where
a function is not going to be reused, but they are most important--both in
JavaScript development generally, and in functional programming
specifically--for creating _closures_.

  [lc]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus


Closures
--------

A closure is a function with free variables bound in its lexical environment.
That's a bit of a mouthful, so let's take it piece by piece. Here's an example
of a function containing a free variable.

{% highlight javascript %}
var f = function(x) {
    var y = 5;
    
    return x + y + z;
};
{% endhighlight %}

The variable `x`, as a parameter of `f`, is _bound_ in the scope of that
function. Variables can also be bound with the `var` keyword, so the variable
`y` is also considered a bound variable. The variable `z`, however, is not
bound either as a parameter of `f` or within the function body using the `var`
keyword, so we say it occurs _free_.

If a function containing a free variable is a closure, then that variable must
be bound in some outer scope, i.e. in the environment of the function. To make
`f` into a closure we must bind `y` in `f`'s environment.

{% highlight javascript %}
(function() {
    var y = 1,
    
    f = function(x) {
        var y = 5;
        
        return x + y + z;
    };
  
    return f;
})();
{% endhighlight %}

One important use of closures, outside functional programming strictly defined,
is memoisation. For example, consider a function `fib` which calculates any
given [Fibonacci number][fibnum]. If we recalculate the entire sequence of
Fibonacci numbers each time up to our chosen _n_ the function will run in _O(N)_
time. However, if we memoise the results it will return previously-calculated
results in _O(1)_ time, and results which haven't yet been calculated will be
returned in _O(N-x)_ time, where _x_ is the number of previously-calculated
results.

By creating a new anonymous function and immediately calling it, we can hide
the memoised sequence from the rest of the program, thus ensuring it can't be
accidentally overwritten, and allowing our function to retain a pure interface.

{% highlight javascript %}
var fib = (function() {
    var sequence = [0, 1],
    
    updateTo = function(limit) {
        for (var i = sequence.length; i <= limit; i++) {
            sequence[i] = sequence[i - 1] + sequence[i - 2];
        }
    };
    
    // This closure, as the return value of the immediately-executed
    // lambda, will be assigned to the variable 'fib'.
    return function(index) {
        if (!sequence[index]) {
            updateTo(index);
        }
        
        return sequence[index];
    };
})();
{% endhighlight %}

Richard Cornford's [discussion of JavaScript closures][closures] is a
valuable supplement to this section, while [this article][fibcosts] contains an
interesting look at potential hidden complexity costs of the algorithm
shown above.

  [fibnum]:   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number
  [closures]: http://www.jibbering.com/faq/faq_notes/closures.html
  [fibcosts]: http://www.catonmat.net/blog/on-the-linear-time-algorithm-for-finding-fibonacci-numbers/


Higher-order functions
----------------------

Amongst the benefits of functional programming are brevity, clarity and
generality. We can write simple code which describes our intentions clearly,
and produce general-purpose tools which can then be specialised to the task at
hand.

One example of a specific task is adding 1 to every number in a list. We can
break this down into two functions: a function _f_ that adds 1 to any number,
and a function _g_ that applies the first function to each value in a list.

> f(x) = x + 1

So _f(0) = 1_, _f(1) = 2_ and so on. `Map` is a function which takes two
arguments, a function and a list, and applies the function to each value in the
list.

> g = map(f)

We now have a function _g_ which can be passed a list of values, and produces a
new list as a result, e.g. _g(\[1,2,3\]) → \[2,3,4\]_. More generally,

> g(\[x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>, ..., x<sub>n-1</sub>, x<sub>n</sub>\]) →
> \[f(x<sub>1</sub>), f(x<sub>2</sub>), ..., f(x<sub>n-1</sub>),
> f(x<sub>n</sub>)\]

`Map` is an example of a higher-order function--a function that takes another
function as an argument.


Referential transparency
------------------------



Currying
--------



Folding over lists
------------------

We have seen that `map` can be specialised to perform particular kinds of
transformation, but `map` itself is a specialisation of a more general type of
function: fold.

Folds take lists and reduce them to another value. In the case of `map`, this
is another list of the same length as the initial list, but the result of the
fold could as easily be a single number, or a string, or some more complex data
type.

Folds take three arguments: a function, an initial value, and a list. A simple
example is `sum`, a function that takes a list of numbers and adds them
together: _sum(\[1,2,3\]) → 6_, and more generally,

> sum(\[x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>, ..., x<sub>n-1</sub>, x<sub>n</sub>\]) →
> x<sub>1</sub> + x<sub>2</sub> + ... + x<sub>n-1</sub> + x<sub>n</sub>

Let's start by defining the function `add` which will take the result of the
fold so far and add it to the current value.

> add x y = x + y

We could write this almost as simply in JavaScript.

{% highlight javascript %}
var add = function(x, y) {
    return x + y;
};
{% endhighlight %}

`Sum` is then simply the function we get by passing `add` and an initial value
(in this case `0`) to `fold`.

> sum = fold(add, 0)

JavaScript's built-in fold function is called `reduce`, but as we can't
partially apply standard library functions, we'll have to curry it.

{% highlight javascript %}
var sum = function(list) {
    var _sum = function() {
        return reduce(add, 0, list);
    };
    
    return list ? _sum(list) : _sum;
};
{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, we can use the `foldl` function we defined earlier, for a far
simpler construction.

{% highlight javascript %}
var sum = foldl(add, 0);
{% endhighlight %}


Specialising folds
------------------



Why functional programming?
---------------------------

To understand why functional programming matters, in general, one should begin
by reading John Hughes' paper, [Why Functional Programming Matters][whyfp].

  [whyfp]: http://www.cs.chalmers.se/~rjmh/Papers/whyfp.html
