internet-explorer.md, before:

---
layout:   article
title:    Working around Internet Explorer
previous: helium
next:     /
---


`onload` events for cached images
---------------------------------

In Internet Explorer, the `onload` event for cached images fires as soon as the
`src` attribute of the image is set. This means code that works by injecting
images into the page may work the first time that an image is loaded, but not
once it's cached. Broken code will look something like this:

    var image = Ojay(Ojay.HTML.img({
        alt: 'Hiroshige woodcut print of sushi bowl',
        src: '/hiroshige-sushi.jpg'
    }));
    
    image.on('load', function(img) {
        alert(img.node.alt + ' loaded');
    });

This will work in the other major browsers, and in Internet Explorer the first
time the page loads up, but not thereafter. To resolve the problem, rewrite it
in this style: create the image, add the event handler, and only then set the
`src` attribute.

    var image = Ojay(Ojay.HTML.img({
        alt: 'Hiroshige woodcut print of sushi bowl',
    }));
    
    image.on('load', function(img) {
        alert(img.node.alt + ' loaded');
    });
    
    image.set({
        src: '/hiroshige-sushi.jpg'
    });

It's not as elegant, but it has the advantage of actually working.

Commit message:

Explain why the Internet Explorer appendix exists.

internet-explorer.md, after:

---
layout:   article
title:    Working around Internet Explorer
previous: helium
next:     /
---


Generally speaking, cross-browser compatibility issues should be resolved at
the library level, rather than left for application developers to deal with.
However, certain problems are hard to solve generically, so this appendix
addresses some common Internet Explorer problems which developers need to be
aware of.


`onload` events for cached images
---------------------------------

In Internet Explorer, the `onload` event for cached images fires as soon as the
`src` attribute of the image is set. This means code that works by injecting
images into the page may work the first time that an image is loaded, but not
once it's cached. Broken code will look something like this:

    var image = Ojay(Ojay.HTML.img({
        alt: 'Hiroshige woodcut print of sushi bowl',
        src: '/hiroshige-sushi.jpg'
    }));
    
    image.on('load', function(img) {
        alert(img.node.alt + ' loaded');
    });

This will work in the other major browsers, and in Internet Explorer the first
time the page loads up, but not thereafter. To resolve the problem, rewrite it
in this style: create the image, add the event handler, and only then set the
`src` attribute.

    var image = Ojay(Ojay.HTML.img({
        alt: 'Hiroshige woodcut print of sushi bowl',
    }));
    
    image.on('load', function(img) {
        alert(img.node.alt + ' loaded');
    });
    
    image.set({
        src: '/hiroshige-sushi.jpg'
    });

It's not as elegant, but it has the advantage of actually working.
